docs: [RFC] responsive grid FE-2446 (#2564)
Sage/carbon: rfcs/text/responsiveGrid.md

- Start Date: 2019-12-11

# Summary

A responsive grid system is a layout component that provides guidance on how components should be positioned within a user interface, adapting to screen size and orientation. We, the Carbon team would like to implement the grid system designed by Sage UI designers.

# Basic example

http://designsystem.sage.com/product/invoice/

# Motivation

The grid layout is intended to solve a number of problems that are often experienced when developing complex web applications:
1. CSS floats are not well suited to application layout.
2. Layouts that use a combination of tables, javascript and floated elements are often brittle and can behave unexpectedly.
3. Fixed layouts that behave predictably cannot take advantage of the entire screen real estate.

A well designed grid layout will be:
1. Consistent, which helps users navigate and understand where information will be found.
2. Responsive, which gives users a predictable experience across multiple devices with different screen sizes.

> 3. Adaptable, when designs change over time new design themes can be introduced more quickly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Adaptable, enabling new design themes to be introduced more quickly as designs evolve over time.
```

# Detailed design

> By dividing the available space vertically and horizontally into predictably sized modules complex layouts that don't have fixed dimensions can be controlled and components can be positioned allowing a clean separation of content and style. Once the underlying structure of a design is mapped breakpoints can be used to control how each component responds at given widths. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By dividing the available space into predictably-sized modules (both vertically and horizontally), complex layouts that don't have fixed dimensions can be controlled and components can be positioned allowing a clean separation of content and style. Once the underlying structure of a design is mapped, breakpoints can be used to control how each component responds at given widths.
```

> For maximum flexibility the Design System responsive grid uses 12 equal width columns. 12 is divisible into 12, 6, 4, 3, 2 or 1 even widths columns giving maximum possible flexibility for a layout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For maximum flexibility, the Design System responsive grid uses 12 equal-width columns. 12 is divisible into 12, 6, 4, 3, 2 or 1 equal-width columns, giving maximum possible flexibility for a layout.
```

> For full details of the proposal read the [Sage Design System Grid](http://designsystem.sage.com/foundations/grid/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For full details of the proposal, read the [Sage Design System Grid](http://designsystem.sage.com/foundations/grid/).
```

> To avoid introducing a breaking change, and to leave whether or not to use the component in the hands of a developer, a new `Grid` Component will be developed that can be used at the same level as the `<AppWrapper />` as a grid wrapper for components. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid introducing a breaking change, and to give developers the freedom to choose whether or not to use the component, a new `Grid` Component will be developed, that can be used at the same level as the `<AppWrapper />`, as a grid wrapper for components. 
```

> the `<GridLayout />` will supply props to define breakpoints and number of columns and will be styled using CSS Grid Layout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `<GridLayout />` will supply props to define breakpoints and number of columns, and will be styled using CSS Grid Layout.
```

> Code example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Code example:
```

> ```

Reviewer: To enable syntax-highlighting in the code example:
```suggestion
```jsx
```

>   import AppWrapper from 'carbon-react/lib/components/app-wrapper';

Reviewer: The indenting within the code example needs to be cleaned up. For example:
```suggestion
import AppWrapper from 'carbon-react/lib/components/app-wrapper';
```

  import { GridLayout, GridRow, GridColumn }  from 'carbon-react/lib/components/grid';
  
  const Index = () => (
  <AppWrapper>
    <GridLayout 
      breakpoints={[100, 200, 300, 400, 500]}
      columns={12}>
        <GridRow>
            <GridColumn>
              <MyComponent />
            </GridColumn>
            <GridColumn>
              <MyComponent /> 
            </GridColumn>
            <GridColumn>
              <MyComponent />
            </GridColumn>
        </GridRow>
      </GridLayout>
    </AppWrapper>
  );
```

## CSS Grid Layout

> CSS Grid Layout is a truly two dimensional grid allowing us to specify dimensions of rows and columns and control where we position components within the grid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CSS Grid Layout is a truly two-dimensional grid, allowing us to specify dimensions of rows and columns, and control where we position components within the grid.
```

> Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example:
```

> ```

Reviewer: To enable syntax-highlighting in the code example:
```suggestion
```css
```

.parent {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: 1fr 3fr 1fr; /* Three columns, one three times as wide as the others */
  grid-template-rows: 200px auto 100px; /* Three rows, two with explicit widths */
  grid-template-areas:
    "header header header"
    ". main sidebar"
    "footer . .";
}

/*
  Now, we can explicitly place items in the defined rows and columns.
*/
.child-1 {
  grid-area: header;
}

.child-2 {
  grid-area: main;
}

.child-3 {
  grid-area: sidebar;
}

.child-4 {
  grid-area: footer;
}
```
# Drawbacks

> When you consider that a grid layout is created to serve the same content on different view ports it comes with a few disadvantage:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Considering that a grid layout is created to serve the same content on different-width viewports, it comes with a few disadvantages:
```

> 1. Development time. It requires more work from the designer and developer than the equivalent single width design. Although this is true, familiarity will increase the turn around speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Development time. It requires more work from the designer and developer (compared to the equivalent single-width design), although familiarity will increase the turn-around speed.
```

> 2. Page load speed. All the data is served to all view ports, regardless of how much real estate you have available and how much content is actually displayed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Page load speed. All the data is served to all viewports, regardless of how much real estate is available and how much content is actually displayed.
```

> 3. Accessibility. Grid position of a component may be different to the DOM order causing flow and context discrepancies when using screen readers, and users who navigate with a keyboard may experience unexpected sequences when tabbing through components. The recommendation is that grid ordering and placement is used for only for visual, not logical, reordering of content. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Accessibility. The grid position of a component may be different to the DOM order, causing flow and context discrepancies when using screen readers, and users who navigate with a keyboard may experience unexpected sequences when tabbing through components. The recommendation is that grid ordering and placement is used only for visual (not logical) reordering of content. 
```

For an explaination of what this means in practice see the [Mozilla CSS Grid Layout](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Grid_Layout/CSS_Grid_Layout_and_Accessibility#Visual_not_logical_re-ordering)

# Alternatives

## CSS Flexbox

> Flexbox is designed for layout in one dimension (either a row or a column), although it does enable wrapping you can't control where components will be positioned since they are really just being pushed along a single axis until they wrap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flexbox is designed for layout in one dimension (either a row or a column). Although it does support wrapping, the second-dimension positioning of components cannot be controlled (since the components are just being pushed along a single axis until they wrap).
```

> Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example:
```

> ```

Reviewer: To enable syntax-highlighting in the code example:
```suggestion
```css
```

.parent {
  display: flex;
  flex-flow: row wrap; /* OK elements, go as far as you can on one line, then wrap as you see fit */
}
```
Overlapping modules within a Flexbox layout requires creative use of negative margins, transforms, and/or absolute positioning.

## CSS Framework (Bootstrap or Foundation)

[Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com/)  
[Foundation](https://foundation.zurb.com/)

> Including a framework in Carbon, a library that is built with Styled Components at it's heart, would require generating a special `StyledComponent` at a global level to enable CSS resets and base stylesheets, which may cause conflicts with Carbon's Base Theme. There would be other disadvantages too:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Including a CSS framework in Carbon (a library built with [Styled Components](https://www.styled-components.com/) at its heart) would require generating a special `StyledComponent` at a global level to enable CSS resets and base stylesheets, which may cause conflicts with Carbon's Base Theme. There would be other disadvantages too:
```

1. Difficulty in overriding the framework code.
2. Bloated codebase that attempts to solve compatibility and support issues we don't need.
3. More complex markup.

> Although a CSS framework would come with some advantages comprehensive documentation, community support and potentially quicker development speeds they have been rejected in favour of the CSS Grid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although a CSS framework would come with some advantages (comprehensive documentation, community support and potentially quicker development speeds), the Carbon team has concluded that the disadvantages outweigh these advantages.
```

# Detailed design

By dividing the available space into predictably-sized modules (both vertically and horizontally), complex layouts that don't have fixed dimensions can be controlled and components can be positioned allowing a clean separation of content and style. Once the underlying structure of a design is mapped, breakpoints can be used to control how each component responds at given widths.

For maximum flexibility, the Design System responsive grid uses 12 equal-width columns. 12 is divisible into 12, 6, 4, 3, 2 or 1 equal-width columns, giving maximum possible flexibility for a layout.

For full details of the proposal, read the [Sage Design System Grid](http://designsystem.sage.com/foundations/grid/).

To avoid introducing a breaking change, and to give developers the freedom to choose whether or not to use the component, a new `Grid` Component will be developed, that can be used at the same level as the `<AppWrapper />`, as a grid wrapper for components. 
The `<GridLayout />` will supply props to define breakpoints and number of columns, and will be styled using CSS Grid Layout.

Code example:
```jsx

> import AppWrapper from 'carbon-react/lib/components/app-wrapper';

Reviewer 2: indentation is off here (either this should be indented by one or everything below it should be aligned to this)

  import { GridLayout, GridRow, GridColumn }  from 'carbon-react/lib/components/grid';
  
  const Index = () => (
  <AppWrapper>
    <GridLayout 

>       breakpoints={[100, 200, 300, 400, 500]}

Reviewer 2: Can we expand a bit more on what this would represent?

The design breakpoints call for:

<table>
    <tr>
      <th>Breakpoints (measured in dpª)</th>
      <th>Device Type</th>
      <th>Margins</th>
      <th>Gutters</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Extra Small (320 to 599px)</td>
      <td>Smart Phones</td>
      <td>16px</td>
      <td>16px</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Small (600 to 959px)</td>
      <td>Portrait Tablets</td>
      <td>24px</td>
      <td>16px</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Medium (960 to 1259px)</td>
      <td>Landscape Tablets &amp; Low-Res Laptops</td>
      <td>32px</td>
      <td>24px</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Large (1260 to 1920px)</td>
      <td>High-Res Laptops &amp; Monitors</td>
      <td>40px</td>
      <td>24px</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Extra Large (1921px and above)</td>
      <td>Ultra High-Res Monitors</td>
      <td>40px</td>
      <td>24px</td>
    </tr>
  </table>

ª Density-independent Pixels (dp) - a unit based on the physical density of the screen, so it's universal across devices with different densities, like Apple Retina displays, for example.

Reviewer 2: Would also be interested to see thoughts on how we set the margins/gutters too

Author: The way breakpoints, order and units are set has been revised. Gutters will be set automatically.

Author: The way breakpoints, order and units are set has been revised. Gutters will be set automatically.

  };
  const item1_1500 = {
    maxWidth: 1500,
    unitType: 'px',
    colStart: 1,
    colEnd: 7,
    rowStart: 1,
    rowEnd: 1
  }
  const responsiveItem1Settings = [
    item1_1300,
    item1_900,
    item1_1500
  ];

  const item2_900 = {
    maxWidth: 900,
    unitType: 'px',
    colStart: 1,
    colEnd: 9,
    rowStart: 3,
    rowEnd: 3
  };
  const item2_1300 = {
    maxWidth: 1300,
    unitType: 'px',
    colStart: 1,
    colEnd: 13,
    rowStart: 2,
    rowEnd: 2
  };
  const item2_1500 = {
    maxWidth: 1500,
    unitType: 'px',
    colStart: 7,
    colEnd: 13,
    rowStart: 1,
    rowEnd: 1
  };
  const responsiveItem2Settings = [
    item2_1300,   
    item2_900,
    item2_1500
  ];

  const item3_900 = {
    maxWidth: 900,
    unitType: 'px',
    colStart: 1,
    colEnd: 9,
    rowStart: 1,
    rowEnd: 1
  };
  const item3_1300 = {
    maxWidth: 1300,
    unitType: 'px',
    colStart: 1,
    colEnd: 13,
    rowStart: 3,
    rowEnd: 3
  };
  const item3_1500 = {
    maxWidth: 1500,
    unitType: 'px',
    colStart: 1,
    colEnd: 13,
    rowStart: 2,
    rowEnd: 2
  };
  const responsiveItem3Settings = [
    item3_1300,
    item3_900,
    item3_1500
  ];

>   return (

Reviewer 3: How about this interface:

```js
<GridContainer breakpoints={[900, 1300, 1500?]}>
  <GridItem colStart={1} colEnd={[9,13,7]} rowStart={[2,1,1]} rowEnd={[2,1,1]}>
    cell 1
  </GridItem>
  <GridItem colStart={[1,1,7]} colEnd={[9,13,13]} rowStart={[3,2,1]} rowEnd={[3,2,1]}> 
    cell 2
  </GridItem>
  <GridItem colStart={1} colEnd={[9,13,13]} rowStart={[1,3,2]} rowEnd={[1,3,2]}>
    cell 3
  </GridItem>
</GridContainer>
```

Author: I experimented with this interface and ran into issues with defaults and overides. Following discussion with @jamime we'd like to preserve the proposed interface as a configurable object. This allows us to omit breakpoints and/or css properties for individual GridItems. I've added further code fragments to illustrate this.

- Start Date: 2019-12-11

# Table of contents

- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [Detailed design](#detailed-design)

>   - [GridContainer](#GridContainer)

Reviewer 4: Think the links need to kebab case

# Alternatives considered

## CSS Flexbox
[`CSS Flexbox`](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-flexbox/) is designed for layout in one dimension (either a row or a column). Although it does support wrapping, the second-dimension positioning of components cannot be controlled (since the components are just being pushed along a single axis until they wrap).

### Advantages
1. If two [`GridItems`](#GridItem) get the same order, you will still see both.
1. You can pass a single value for number of units width required.
1. Order will work as long as numbers are before/after.
1. Move content with just an adjustment to single GridItem (i.e changes from 6 to 12 units and will auto push next column down)

### Disadvantages
1. Overlapping modules within a Flexbox layout requires creative use of negative margins, transforms, and/or absolute positioning.
1. Also has the same accessibility issues around screen readers and keyboard navigation as CSS Grid.

## CSS Framework (Bootstrap or Foundation)

> A CSS framework is a library of predefined CSS styles that a ready to use out-of-the-box. The best known of these are:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A CSS framework is a library of predefined CSS styles that are ready to use out-of-the-box. The best known of these are:
```

### Advantages
1. Comprehensive documentation.
1. Community support.
1. Potentially quicker development speed.

### Disadvantages
1. Including a CSS framework in Carbon (a library built with [Styled Components](https://www.styled-components.com/) at its heart) would require generating a special `StyledComponent` at a global level to enable CSS resets and base stylesheets, which may cause conflicts with Carbon's Base Theme. There would be other disadvantages too:
1. Difficulty in overriding the framework code.
1. Bloated codebase that attempts to solve compatibility and support issues we don't need.
1. More complex markup.

# Comparison Methodology
In order to evaluate the competing CSS styling options (Grid v Flexbox) a simple layout concept was proposed and a solution developed in each approach under consideration.
## Layout
![Layout](../images/concept.png)

### CSS Grid
```html
<h1>CSS Grid</h1>
<div class="GridContainer">
  <div class="GridItem item1" data-start="1" data-end="7" data-row="1">1</div>
  <div class="GridItem item2" data-start="7" data-end="13" data-row="1">2</div>
  <div class="GridItem item3" data-start="1" data-end="13" data-row="1">3</div>
</div>

> <hr/>

Reviewer 6: Don't really need to add a hr?

<div class="GridContainer">
  <div class="GridItem item1" data-start="1" data-end="13" data-row="1">1</div>
  <div class="GridItem item2" data-start="1" data-end="13" data-row="2">2</div>
  <div class="GridItem item3" data-start="1" data-end="13" data-row="3">3</div>
</div>

<hr/>

<div class="GridContainer">
  <div class="GridItem item1" data-start="1" data-end="13" data-row="2">1</div>
  <div class="GridItem item2" data-start="1" data-end="13" data-row="3">2</div>
  <div class="GridItem item3" data-start="1" data-end="13" data-row="1">3</div>
</div>
```
#### CSS (abridged)
```css
.GridContainer {
  display: grid;
  grid-gap: 24px;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(12, 1fr);
  width: 100%;
}

.GridItem {

>   box-sizing: border-box;

Reviewer 6: Just to check, is this value not passed to all elements by default or has to be added per item?

Author: It's by default, this is just for clarity.
